Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined for a second time by Doctor
Patrick Hasan. He's a senior lecturer at the School
of English Communication and Philosophy at Cardiff University. I'm
leaving a. To our first interview in the description,
which was about his book, Nietzsche's struggle against Pessimism.
And today we're talking about the philosophy of suicide.
So, Doctor Hassan, welcome back to the show. It's
always a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much for having me back.
So, what is then the philosophy of suicide? What
kinds of questions do you explore
there? Yeah, so the, the philosophy of suicide is
an attempt, uh, just like in, in other fields,
to understand the phenomenon of suicide. Um, SPECIFIC philosophical
approaches will typically involve questions pertaining to the rationality
of suicide. Can we understand it as a rational
phenomenon? Um, WHAT kinds of things would motivate suicidal
behavior? Um, AND I'd, I'd say primarily it's been
approached from a, from a perspective in moral philosophy.
So is suicide ever, and, and, and could there
be any circumstances which suicide is morally permissible in
under what circumstances would it be permissible? Could suicide
ever be morally required, um, which is a, a
stronger claim. um. And I would say that most
of what goes on in, in the philosophy of
suicide has, has really worked under the umbrella of,
um, yeah, moral psychology, normative ethics.
And I mean, the approach that you have in
in the philosophy of suicide, how does it compare
to approaches in other more scientific domains like for
example, psychology, sociology, and medicine slash psychiatry?
Yeah, it's a good question. Uh, SO, philosophers tend
to emphasize conceptual analysis, but of course, we do
make use of empirical observation too. I would say
in empirical, strictly empirical disciplines like psychology and sociology,
um, what they're trying to do there is really
to understand the etiology of suicide. So what I
mean by that is the strictly trying to understand
the causal mechanisms which give rise to suicide, um,
Uh, the psychologists, that's to do with, yeah, individual
factors. Uh, SOCIOLOGISTS are looking at broader social networks
in which this phenomenon occurs. Um, Whereas, yeah, philosophers
will, will use uh conceptual analysis. Uh, THEY'RE interested
in normative questions, which psychologists and sociologists might not
be. Um, BUT I think it's fair to say
that for any comprehensive understanding of the phenomenon of
suicide. Uh, ALL of these disciplines need to, to
work together. Uh, THERE needs to be somewhat interdisciplinary,
um, not just sociology, psych uh psychology, but also
probably anthropology and history. I would add to that
as well. Um, So, yeah, philosophers, uh, particularly moral
philosophers are doing something slightly different insofar as they,
they're trying to do a more fundamental conceptual analysis
and ask, you know, are there circumstances in which
people ought or ought not to commit suicide? And
that, that ought, the normative concept there is typically
one that strictly empirical disciplines, um, are not going
to analyze.
But the suicide have a specific definition in philosophy?
Does it differ in any way definitionally from how
it is approached in other areas of knowledge? I
mean, what do you have to say about that?
Yeah, I would say that philosophers are typically a
little bit more attentive to how we define this,
um, as might be expected. Uh, THERE'S, there's huge
disagreement about even how to define this, um, before
analyzing whether it's, you know, morally permissible or not
and under what circumstances. So, Um, I would say
that that attention to the definition of suicide only
really becomes, um, something which, which gets a lot
of attention in the sort of 20th century and
contemporary, contemporary kind of uh uh philosophy of suicide.
I think a general first pass at trying to
define what this would, what this actually is would
be something like self-caused death. Um, BUT once you
start thinking about some counterexamples, it becomes quite clear
that that's not going to be adequate. So just
to give you a couple of examples, um. Say
something like death from a drug overdose or from
uh years and years of smoking or something like
this. Uh, WELL, it's self-caused and it results in
death in some cases, but we wouldn't really want
to call it suicides, which suggests that it lacks
that definition lacks some kind of essential feature. In
those cases, probably something like intention, intention to die.
Um, DIFFERENT kinds of cases, you could point to
this phenomenon called suicide by cop, where this is
a kind of method of attempting to kill oneself,
where one provokes, uh, law enforcement or anyone armed
basically, uh, by presenting yourself as a threat. So
they, um, they, they shoot the, the person in
question. And die as a result. Um, THAT looks
like there's an intention to die, but it's not
self-caused. So these kinds of counterexamples pose problems for
just a sort of an intuitive account of, of
suicide as self-caused death. So what that might suggest
is that a general kind of understanding of what
this might be, could be something like. Um, A
self-caused death where there's an intention to die, and
that one's actions, one predicts that, uh, those actions
will lead to that death, that desired to death.
Um, IT'S not a perfect definition, so some people
have also built in other kinds of, uh, conditions
for this. For example, some people think that it
also has to be freely chosen or freely willed,
uh, to distinguish from cases where someone might be
coerced. Uh, INTO suicide. So, you know, it's very
controversial, for example, whether Socrates committed suicide, right? He
was ordered by the judiciary of Athens to, to
commit suicide. He drank the hemlock, um, but whether
this was a freely chosen action is, is, uh,
controversial. So, There's, there's a little bit of controversy,
but I think certainly up within the 19th century
and prior to that, there was a kind of
general understanding of this claim, uh, that suicide is
really just self-caused death where where there's an intention.
To die. Um, I think there's, it's worth maybe
pointing out a qualification about this, so. One point
is that some people have tried to define suicide
in this way that we've been talking about by
pointing to necessary and sufficient conditions and whether they
obtain in some circumstances rather than others. Another approach
would be to take what would be a sort
of uh Wittgensteinian approach to defining it in terms
of family resemblance. So it's not that it, it
satisfies certain conditions, but rather there's a kind of
general family of related um Things which have to
be present in order for us to consider something
suicide doesn't mean that all of them have to
be present at one time, um, but maybe some
of them, not others. Um, SO Wittgenstein famously has
this approach to a number of concepts, um, like
games, for example, doesn't think that we can really
have a central definition of what a game is.
Maybe it's a family resemblance concept. Some people have
thought about gender this way too. So that's another
way of thinking about it that's rather different. But
another qualification which probably should be mentioned is that
the term suicide carries with it a negative connotation,
right? It has, there is an evaluative side to
this term, um, that might affect how we conceive
of some actions of suicide rather than others. Um,
SO, when people who are considered morally vicious, villains,
uh, when they have. Committed suicide, like the case
of Hitler, for example, no one really denies that
that's a case of suicide. Uh, BUT in cases
where people are morally admirable, they're perhaps martyrs or
heroes in some way, they might be more reluctant
to do that precisely because this is the thought
anyway, precisely because there's the built in negative connotation
to the term, um, that makes it quite hard
to separate out our evaluative starting points from a
purely descriptive definition. Uh, SO that might be one
intrinsic difficulty to, to giving a, a just a
strictly impartial, neutral, evaluatively neutral definition of the term.
But yeah, I would say that the, the sort
of generally accepted starting point would be self-caused death
where there's an intention to die.
How long have philosophers been thinking about suicide? I
mean, how, how old is the philosophy of suicide?
Um, IT'S, it's, it's ancient really. I mean, I
would say at least in the Western traditions, people
have been thinking about the philosophy of suicide at
least as far back as Plato. Uh, SO Plato
generally has a negative view of suicide, but allows
it to be permissible in certain circumstances that he
outlines in the laws. Um, Aristotle barely mentions it,
but he does have a passage where he, he
denies that. Suicide is an injustice to the self,
but rather conceives of it as a sort of
injustice to the state or to society, though he
doesn't quite say a lot about why that is.
Um, THE Stoics, Seneca, Cicero were also interested in
the question of suicide and had a generally more
positive attitude towards it, that the, the scope for
permissibility with, with suicide was a lot wider than
it was for, say, Plato or Aristotle. Um, THEY
even thought that it might be admirable, right? So
in one, in circumstances where what they would describe
as the conditions for a well-lived life, if they're,
if they're no longer present, um, Then they think
that it would, they thought that it would just
be wildly irrational to continue living, um, and that
facing your death would actually be noble in those,
those circumstances. So, yeah, people in philosophy have been
thinking about this for a long time, um. In
outside of the Western traditions as well, Confuciuser has
something to say about this, who's writing around the
same time, a little bit earlier than Aristotle. Um,
BUT conceives of the wrongs of suicide is, if
it is wrong, primarily as a violation of duty
to, again, to society or, or more specifically to,
uh, one's family. So there's a, there's a long
tradition of thinking about suicide by philosophers, uh, in
moral terms.
And you mentioned that uh the philosophy of suicide
usually approaches it through a moral lens. I mean,
it's more from the, the point of view of
moral philosophy slash ethics. But how was suicide morally
approached by philosophers and other thinkers before the 19th
century? Because we're we're then going to talk about
a shift that occurred during the 19th century, but
before that, how was it approached from a moral
standpoint?
Yeah, good. Um, SO I think the major change
probably after these, these ancient thinkers, another shift that
happened, um, in the history of, history of moral
philosophy would be in the, with the rise of
Christianity, and particularly in the medieval period where it
really dominates um all intellectual activity. Um, AND there
you see it, as you might expect, an overwhelmingly
negative approach to suicide, uh, moral condemnation of suicide,
um, in, in various ways. So, some people thought
of this as a violation to the self, right?
That we might have duties to ourselves in various
ways, um, and that suicide undermines those, um, There's
also perhaps, as we've mentioned, duties to others. So
there's a social uh social sort of aspect to
this. Uh, BY committing suicide, you may be harming
the family, the wider society, the state. Um, AND
also, particularly a Christian way of looking at this
was that it might violate duties to God in
some capacity, that God really has dominion over, uh,
human lives. We don't really have the authority to
be able to check in and out of life.
That's really up to God. Um, AND that by
committing suicide, one deprives God of that right. Um.
You know, Aquinas, Augustine, thinkers within the Christian tradition
made arguments of this kind, um, and others as
well. I mean, another type of theological argument that
was sometimes given was that. Uh, LIFE is, can
be conceived as a kind of gift, right? Life
is wonderful and good and that we're sort of
honored to be given this opportunity to live, uh,
in this life and that by committing suicide, one
expresses, uh, a kind of ingratitude or something like
that, um, for God's gift of life, um, and
this is a different type of moral wrong, um.
So I think that that was kind of a,
that was a very dominant way of looking at
suicide for a few 100 years at least. Um,
THINGS started to change in the Enlightenment where people
started to openly challenge arguments the existence of God.
Uh, Christianity as an institution started to decline and
influence, um, the rise of secularism was, was the
cause of this. Um, SO you have philosophers like
David Hume who writes this essay of suicide. It's
published posthumously where he really goes after all of
the traditional arguments against suicide, particularly grounded in, um,
uh, a theistic worldview. Um, AND really demolishes these
arguments. Um, THAT had a huge impact in how
people thought of the practice. Um, ONE of the
people I'm sure we'll talk about later, Schopenhauer, was
full of admiration for, for this essay and thought
it pretty definitive. But this isn't to say that
in the Enlightenment period, it was uniformly um. Sort
of, uh, more, more, um, open to the permissibility
of suicide because a major figure within writing in
the 19th century. Uh, AND the 18th century was.
Emmanuel Kant, who was staunchly against suicide and had
a variety of arguments which didn't necessarily consider it
as, or at least in his best moments, didn't
really consider it a violation to God's authority or
anything like this, but really as a kind of
practical contradiction. Um, THE moral law as he conceived
it emanates from our, our autonomy, uh, our dignity
is rational human beings, and that suicide involved a
kind of practical contradiction in destroying the source of
the moral law. Um, SO he, unlike Hume, um,
thought it had a pretty negative condemnation of suicide,
though, uh, primarily outside of the theological context which
dominated the medieval period.
OK, so as I mentioned in my previous question,
we're going now to talk about the shift that
occurred during the 19th century from when people were
thinking and approaching suicide, mostly from a from a
moral standpoint or thinking about it in moral terms
to then thinking about it in more biological and
or psychosociological terms in the 19th century. So, what
changes were brought with this?
Yeah, good. This is definitely an important shift in
the philosophy of suicide, and I think generally, just
on, from the outset, you can see this shift
occurring in just the terminology that gets used. So
instead of talk of violations of duty, good and
evil, these terms tend to get replaced by terms
like health and sickness, um, which were intended at
least to be. Um, WHOLLY descriptive ways that we
could describe the phenomenon of suicide, which replaced what
were considered these antiquated sort of old fashioned, um.
Sort of, yeah, metaphysically suspect concepts of good and
evil. So there's a major terminological shift, and that's
primarily because there's this explosion of success in the
empirical sciences. Um, THE decline of, um, yeah, as
we've said, the decline of theism, the, the decline
of, uh, religious institutions. Um, SO there's this, this
renewed sort of interest in how, how much science
can help us explain this phenomenon. The stagnant debates
about the good and bad, good and evil of
of suicide tend to be, they tend to take
the backseat at this period. And I'd say there's
two major types of approach, um, that we can,
we can identify. So one kind of approach, as
you mentioned, is thinking about suicide um in terms
of. Individual health, right, so as a biological phenomenon,
um, as the product of a sort of, uh,
yeah, the bodily or mental decline in some respect.
So. Broadly, you can think about suicide for these
thinkers, um, as a sort of symptom of illness
that needs to be treated, right, in some way.
So, just a couple of examples, for people who
thought of things this way. So the Danish phys
uh physician, uh, uh, Heinrich Callison sort of had
this approach. It was quite influential. Um, Max Nordau,
who was a degeneration theorist, thought that the best
way of explaining suicide was by appealing to this.
Um, CONCEPT of neuroasthenia, which is basically this idea
that some individuals were Extremely susceptible um to various
stimuli, just hypersensitive to various stimuli. Um, AND that
in our sort of modernizing hustle and bustle of
contemporary society and civilization, rapidly industrializing civilization, we're just
bombarded with all this stimuli all of the time,
information, noise, um, all these different effects on our
senses. And his basic idea is that. Neuroasthenia developed
as as a kind of fatigue or exhaustion from
oversensitiveness to these stimuli. And that eventually it would,
it overwhelmed these individuals such that everything in their
consciousness registers, registers to them as a kind of
obstacle or chore. And that over time, eventually that's
gonna build up where this person will just be
in the state of, really define existence in terms
of their suffering, and that's what pushes them towards
Thinking about suicide as a way of stopping that.
Um, AND again there's others in the tradition as
well. The English physician George Burrows thinks about what
he thought about suicide is really derived from melancholia,
um, for some similar kinds of reasons. So you've,
one way of thinking about the sort of medicalization
of, of, of suicide or the problem of suicide
is as a kind of Yeah, an illness to
be treated was in these individual terms. A second
way of thinking about it within this kind of
medicalization, um, this kind of broadly scientific approach which
dominates the 19th century, is as a social phenomenon,
as a sort of social, um, illness. Something that
is a product of various kinds of breakdowns or
or declines of the social order. Um, And I,
I just want to make it clear that I
think these things aren't mutually exclusive, right, so a
lot of people thought that. What explains individual bodily
or mental decline was in some way intrinsically connected
to broader social decline. Um, SO, Some people thought
that the Italian physician Enrico Morselli, for example, was
extremely influential here. He thought of suicide really as
a symptom of this effect of the struggle for
existence in very Darwinian terms, social Darwinian terms, um,
that really what's going on is that as society
evolves and society becomes more civilized. Um, THIS creates
a kind of fight, uh, for resources, fight for
survival, and the people who can't keep up with
this are going to be more susceptible to suicide.
Um, PROBABLY the most famous social account, uh, would
be Durkheim, uh, the sociologist Emile Durkheim looked at,
as did everyone at the time, they looked at
specifically modern society and thought there was a specifically
modern problem here. That what's correlating with rapid industrialization,
um, urbanization was. A sharp rise in the rates
of suicide, and he tried to explain this in
terms of this concept of annoy, which is the
kind of. Uh, A social condition which is really
defined by a breakdown of the social norms which
facilitate understanding, uh, and sort of communal interaction between
the members of a society. Um, HE thought that
when this happens, when there's too much regulation, too
many rules, or too little, this kind of state
of enemy, this kind of sense of aimlessness, meaningless,
directionless, uh, behavior, a lack of being able to
predict or expect particular outcomes, this would arise and
that this is the actual primary cause of suicide.
Um, SO when we talk about psycho-sociological approaches to
suicide in the 19th century, this medicalization of the
view, I think these are the two main strands
which have interplay in various ways. The suicide is
a symptom of individual decline, mental illness, and suicide
is a symptom of some kind of broader social
degenerational decline.
OK, but then also in the 19th century, we
have to talk about pessimism with figures like Arthur
Schopenhauer. So, but before we get into Schopenhauer himself,
how does pessimism and pessimist philosophy relate to the
phenomenon of suicide?
Yeah, so as you mentioned, this was a dominant
philosophical dispute in 19th century Germany in particular. And
pessimists, but the general definition that became the de
facto definition, uh, that these, these figures were working
with. Is that pessimism is the view that life
is not worth living, that it would be better
if we were never born at all. Uh, AND
one of the primary justifications, not the sole justification,
but a primary justification for this view, this provocative
view, was that suffering was ubiquitous and inevitable, and
it was always going to outweigh any pleasures, the
minimal pleasures that we have in life. Um, And
as you mentioned, Schopenhauer really developed this into a
philosophical theory, and it was, it was developed further
by his interlocutors and followers at a later time.
And this interacts with the philosophy of suicide, because
you might think, look, obviously, if life is really
that bad, um, if there's inevitable suffering that we
can never really alleviate to any significant degree. Um,
DOESN'T suicide start to look very rational? Doesn't it
start to look like it's the best course of
action? Um, AND that might even be required, uh,
you know, precisely because we just, things cannot get
better. So wouldn't it be better for us to
commit suicide if something like pessimism is true? And
that question animated quite a lot of the pessimism
dispute. Does pessimism really entail suicide? Does it really
um. Sort of push us in that direction. Um,
SO that was, I think that's the primary relationship
between these two, phenomena.
Uh, AND I mean, does pessimism actually entail suicide?
Does suicide necessarily follow from pessimism or or not?
Uh, SO a lot of the pessimists at the
time, and, uh, think that the answer to that
is no, that that suicide just is not entailed
uh by a pessimistic worldview. Um, AND a lot
of this will depend upon other philosophical commitments that
they had because they were quite diverse in, in
what they thought and why they thought it. But
I think the general view, um, is that, uh,
yeah, suicide is not entailed by pessimism precisely because
Um, there might still be moral reasons, uh, to
avoid suicide. So even if it's. Prudentially better that
we might, it was better that we just were
never born at all. Once we're born into the
world and we're part of a kind of network
of other human beings. They, there might be moral
reasons to avoid, avoid this practice. And in fact,
most pessimists in the dispute, um, did in fact
think that it, that suicide was not, uh, not
always, um, going to be, uh, the right course
of action. There might be some circumstances where it's
permissible, but they offered moral arguments against the practice,
as well as practical ones.
And that includes people like Arthur Schopenhauer and Edward
von Hartmann, who you also mentioned in your work,
right?
That's right, yeah. So, um, Hartman has a particular
kind of moral argument against suicide, which in some
ways is quite um traditional. So we mentioned earlier
these arguments, sort of rooted in Aristotle, uh, but
others pick it up. This idea that suicide violates
uh a duty of concern and care for others
in one's community or family, uh, one's in a
social circle. And that suicide is immoral because it's
ultimately an egoistic action. One weighs up how much
value there is in their life and the value
of continuing their life. And if they opt for
a negative answer to that, they commit suicide as
a means of stopping their own pain and suffering.
He thinks it's understandable, and he wants to take
out some of the highly charged emotional venom, which
he thinks infects a lot of the sort of
medieval ways of thinking about suicide. So he thinks
of it as a more understandable phenomenon. But he
does think that. In most cases, where there, where
there are uh people who are involved in a
particular social uh network in a particular society, suicide
is wrong or immoral because it precludes the fulfilling
of obligations to others and might even harm others.
So he has a very social way of cashing
out the morality of suicide. Yeah.
And what did these pessimists uh think about the
medicalization of suicide?
So, generally, uh, I, my interpretation of people like
Hartmann and and and Schopenhauer, who also resisted, um,
resisted, uh, condemning uh suicide as this kind of
ultimate criminal. Uh, CRIMINAL act, um, well he did
want to, to, to say that there are modest
moral reasons for rejecting it, but he was also
like Hartmann. Very interested in in trying to resist
this condemnation of it as this ultimate moral wrong.
Um, THEY both recognize that, look, there might be
some cases in which. Things like insanity, um, and
medical issues can lead to cases of suicide. Um,
THEY both explicitly recognize that this is a possibility,
but they were resistant to the idea that medicalization
could be a comprehensive approach to the phenomenon of
suicide, that all cases could be understood in a
quite simplistic way as symptoms of illness or social
ills, um. They, for that reason, tend to deny
that suicide is really a specifically modern problem at
all. They think that this has always been discussed
by philosophers. This is a deeply human existential problem
to face. It's not just something which arises given
rapid industrialization and urbanization. So, on the one hand,
they, they're interesting because they accept that. Advances in
the in the sciences can help us understand this
phenomenon, and they also think that these advances are
right to um move away from this kind of
very strong emphasis on, on, on suicide as being
uh one of the, the worst crimes imaginable, like
one of these things that you find in the
Christian traditions, for example. They write to emphasize that,
but they. Move away from thinking this can be
comprehensive. They, they sort of think that we can
still philosophize about the morality of suicide, and we
can still offer at least modest reasons for thinking
that there's an ethical issue at play here.
And where do you place the 19th century German
pessimists in relation to the more traditional or progressive
approaches to suicide?
Yeah, I think this is a, a really interesting
question. And one of the things which I, I
try and argue for is that the pessimists represent
an interesting middle ground. Um, SO as I was
saying, I mean, on the one hand, they agree
with these 19th century empirical approaches insofar as they
say, look, uh, these Sort of general condemnations of
suicide in the harshest terms, um, and especially the
arguments that have underpinned them, these theological arguments, um,
these arguments of violating duties to the South. Um,
MOST of these are hopelessly implausible, and they're, they're,
they're probably motivated by sentiment more than anything else.
So Schopenhauer makes this claim explicitly. He thinks that,
you know, Hume demolished these arguments, um. And what
he exposed is that the arguments are so poor
and they're so frail, that they have to be
sort of supported by and buttressed by sentiments of
disapproval and sentiments and of of condemnation. In other
words, priests and priestly philosophers who sympathize with them
implicitly or explicitly have had to condemn suicide in
the strongest terms to make up for the fact
that the arguments against it aren't particularly good. Um,
AND Schopenhauer thought, well, why are they doing that?
I mean, he has this interesting explanation where he
says that look, Christian approaches are broadly optimistic. They
think that the world is good and and wonderful,
and that we should be celebrating its value. But
the problem is, is if you have people committing
suicide, it looks as if something's wrong, right? So
not not all is well in the Garden of
Eden, right? Um, SO he's saying that. Suicide has
to be condemned by people on that side of
the, on that side of the debate, because otherwise
suicide itself is a kind of condemnation against optimistic
presumptions. So on the one hand, people like Schopenhauer
and the other pessimists want to say, these empirical
approaches are real advancements in that they show the
poverty of traditional moralizing about suicide, um. They understand
suicide as something which, you know, should be decriminalized,
it should be something which we should evoke pity
and compassion rather than condemnation. And in that sense
that Schopenhauer and the pessimists are quite progressive. But
they also have 1 ft in the previous century,
insofar as they don't want to give up moralizing
altogether. They do want to give some kind of
um moral argument or arguments against um. Uh, THE,
the, the practice of suicide. And for Schopenhauer, he
has quite peculiar arguments against this. So one is,
is strictly practical, that, um, suicide doesn't really deliver
what the suicidal person wants it to, that really.
They don't give up their willing, which is the
cause of suffering, their intense desiring. They just don't
really like the circumstances in which they've come to,
come to experience. And in that sense, they still
affirm their will. But the moral argument that he
gives, which is, again, quite peculiar, is that he
thinks that suicide precludes reaching the highest good. The
the summon bonham, the highest ethical good that there
is, suicide prevents the attainment of that. And that
highest good for Schopenhauer is what he calls salvationism,
kind of redemption from life, where one gives up
the will completely. And here he's drawing upon a
number of Indian traditions, Buddhism and Hinduism to show
that Craving and striving and desiring is the source
of suffering, and that once you break that will,
once you give up that source of craving and
desiring, suffering will diminish. Uh, YOU become in the
state of, I guess you would call enlightenment, where
you have this sort of distance to sublime experience
of life, uh, where you've completely detached from it.
Um, THERE is an interesting question about how to
the extent to which we can characterize that argument
as moral. Um, BUT he certainly thinks that he
describes it explicitly as the only relevant moral reason
against suicide. So, I think the general answer to
your question is that the pessimists represent an interesting
middle ground insofar as they accept elements of this
kind of progressive. 19th century empirical approach. Uh, BUT
they still have the 1 ft in the previous
century in so far as they, they want to
give moral justifications against the practice as well. Albeit
milder ones, they still have this kind of normative
framework and metaphysical framework for thinking about the morality
of suicide.
So in your work, you also talk about James
Sully's psychological reduction of philosophical pessimism. I mean, a
view where he claims that pessimism, quote, is not
really a philosophical theory at all, but rather a
psychological state, a mood or disposition which is the
product of socioeconomic circumstance, end quote. So, could you
tell us about that and what are your thoughts
about it?
Yeah, absolutely. So, um, yeah, James Sully was this
English psychologist who is not particularly well known now,
but was at the forefront of developing psychology as
an independent discipline towards the end of the 19th
century. Um, YOU know, he was very admired by
Freud and and others in the discipline for his
insights. And he wrote this book called Pessimism. A
history and a criticism, which is a sort of
500 page uh attempted demolition of philosophical pessimist, pessimistic
arguments. And there's a whole chapter dedicated there to
explaining what gives rise to pessimistic sentiment and an
attempt to reduce philosophical pessimism to the sentiments which
produce it. So his basic idea, which was not
original to him, right, this is a very common
view. In the 19th century, and I think still
persists today, um, is this idea that pessimism really
just is an expression of sentiments of disappointment, of
personal suffering. Um, THE German, uh, way of cashing
this out was that pessimism is just this. Experience
of Welschmertz, this kind of phenomenon of sort of
pain of existence, this kind of experience of the
world is really just suffering and misery, um. And
Sully's trying to motivate this view by saying, look,
there's something particularly interesting going on is that the
rise of philosophical pessimism in the 19th century, he
claims, correlates with huge amounts of misery and economic
deprivation, um. And what he's trying to, to claim
is that the best explanation for this correlation is
that it's causal, that really philosophical pessimism just arises
from the circumstances of the time. People are suffering
in various ways, um. And they're also frustrated and
disappointment, disappointed by, uh, not being able to reach
these ideals that were promised to them by various
social justice movements, you know, greater works for right,
for, uh, greater rights for workers, um, you know,
greater freedoms for citizens, etc. Um, THESE weren't really
realized, and so this creates disappointment and suffering, and
that pessimism is really just an expression of these
sentiments. That's the best explanation for what's going on.
Um, AND as I said, this is a particularly
popular argument at the time, um, but I think
there are problems with this view, um, and I
think some of these problems were anticipated by. Um,
19th century pessimists themselves, uh, although maybe they didn't
quite develop them in the ways that they could
have, but they presented some quite serious challenges to
this argument.
And what would be some of those challenges or
at least tell us about the main ones.
Yeah, so maybe I could just briefly give you
three of these arguments that that have been discussed,
um. So one way to challenge this idea that
Sully's presented us with is to. Basically challenged this
correlation that he's giving us, right? He's part of
one of his premises is to, to say. 19th
century Germany was full of suffering. Um, PEOPLE were,
you know, and that he has some evidence for
this, right? There was the founders crash which caused
huge immiseration. You know, life expectancy was not particularly
high. Um, VARIOUS wars are going on, right, with
the French, with surrounding states. Um, THERE'S religious persecution
of, of various kinds, so. He has some evidence
to point to, but one way of challenging this,
this reduction of uh pessimism to feelings of Welchmertz
or, or just feelings of despair and suffering, was
that actually the 19th century was characterized by this
feeling of hope, hopefulness rather than suffering and and
despair. Um, SO Schopenhauer himself makes this point in
a letter to a friend of his, he says.
You know, some people have accused me, even at
the time, they've accused me of really just being
a product of my time, that everything was miserable
at the time and that pessimism, my pessimism just
evolves out of this horrible circumstance that I find
myself. And that, you know, if I lived 100
years prior, um, I would have, I would have
been as optimistic as Leibniz. And he sort of
makes fun of this view by saying that actually,
Germany at his, at his period was hopeful about
progress. It was hopeful about the possibility of various
kinds of social revolution that will bring more freedom,
bring more rights to people, uh, bring independence for
Germany, not being such a dependent state, not being
a fractured state, but unifying. Um, So he makes
this claim that actually, this idea that 19th century
Germany is characterized by despair is just not true.
And if that's right, it would create problems for
Sully's argument. Um, Nietzsche also makes this same claim
in the gay Science. Uh, HE says, well, what,
what explains why pessimism is so popular now? Um,
IT'S not because people are miserable, because People are
actually extremely enthusiastic, and he's really referring to Bismarck's
unification and this idea about military prowess and. You
know, people chanting Deutschland, Deutschland uber alles, right? It's
extreme patriotism that captured the spirit of the time.
Uh, SOMEONE who's written about this in more contemporary
terms, uh, Frederick Beyer, who's written a book called
Welschmertz. It's all about the, the pessimistic tradition. Uh,
HE makes the same argument. He says, actually, the
19th century was characterized by Um, huge advances in,
in the empirical sciences, in medicine, in, in workers'
rights, and people's well-being. So this is really a
time for celebration and happiness rather than despair. So
if, if these kinds of claims are true, then
it creates a problem for Sully's argument that this
is really a product of its time, because the
time seems to be a little bit more optimistic
than Sully's giving it credit for. That's one kind
of challenge. Um, A second kind of challenge which
is to, to say that, well, look, pessimism is
not as historically peculiar as Sully seems to be
proposing in, in at least some of his arguments,
um. Because, you know, pessimists themselves made this point.
They said that look, this isn't something new. We're
actually just trying to capture philosophically, a view that
has been embedded for thousands of years in different
human traditions. Um, IN Buddhism, for example, they think
they have the exact same worldview. In early Christianity,
they think that it's essentially a pessimistic view at
its core, that life is something we need to
be saved from. It needs something we need to
be redeemed from. Um, AND the, the, if you
accept that claim, if you think that pessimism is
far more established in human history and is actually
far more adhered to, then rather than just a
a few peculiar individuals, um, then it looks a
lot harder to explain or to reduce pessimism to
sentiment in the way that Sully wants to do,
because there isn't this kind of neat correlation as
a peculiarity in a particular history of time. So
the pessimists are just gonna say to Sully, you're,
you're begging the question here because pessimism is not
this new fad or phenomenon, right? It's something that's
deeply embedded in the history of human thought that
millions, they claim, have adhered to in some form
or another. Maybe not in strict philosophical terms, but
maybe in allegorical religious dress. Yeah. And I think
that um a 3rd, the 3rd kind of response
that could be given, and I think is pretty
convincing. IS to challenge the inference from the origins
of pessimistic sentiment and belief to the essence of
what philosophical pessimism is. So in other words, there
could be a kind of genetic fallacy going on
here that OK, you might grant to Sully that
these feelings of despair and Welchmert's suffering can lead
one to endorse philosophical pessimism as a, as a
theory, but that doesn't really say anything about the
reasons why we should accept pessimism. They can be
rationally defended and, you know, they could be undermined
or they could be affirmed, but it's still a
rational issue. Even if it's true that a psychological
condition can lead one to accept those reasons, right?
Um, SO. One of the things that's interesting there
is that. What this does is it allows pessimists
to say that. If there is this kind of
distinction, then yes, you know, there might be a
correlation in the 19th century between this kind of
sentiment and pessimistic belief, but that doesn't really undermine
pessimism's status as a theory, right, as a, as
having a theoretical foundation. And in fact, philosophers like
Olga Plumacher, um, explicitly made this challenge to Sully.
They said, you know. Uh, Schopenhauer himself was a
man of Welchmertz. He was completely dominated by feeling,
right? Other pessimists thought of Schopenhauer as. Really corrupted
by his emotions. He gave in to them too
much. They didn't reject pessimism on that basis, but
rather they thought that his pessimism could be improved
by divorcing those sentiments from his theories. But they
both, you know, Hartmann and Plumarker, they recognized Schopenhauer
as Offering a genuine theory, raising pessimism up to
a genuine theory, even if he was led to
think in this way by these feelings, his peculiarities
of his personality and so forth. So that would
be the third challenge, to try and divorce the
origins of pessimistic belief from its status as a,
as a, as a rational theory.
And and what do you think that someone like
Schopenhauer would have replied to Sully's argument?
Yeah, I think along along these terms, I mean,
either one of these three, I think actually all
three of these, um, someone like Schopenhauer and certainly
Pluemarker um at least developed initial responses along these
lines, um. To be fair to Sully, I think
he gives a lot, a lot more sophisticated a
version of this argument than some of his contemporaries,
uh, and colleagues. So he, one way of interpreting
what he's doing is to say, These kinds of
psychological reductions work only when we have established, we've
sort of antecedently established that the reasons to accept
pessimism as a theory aren't convincing. And it's then
and only then we can start to speculate about
why people should come to endorse this peculiar theory.
So by analogy, for example, um, you could say.
Look, we have excellent reasons to reject the idea
that the earth is flat, right? But lots of
people still seem to believe this. Once we've given
those reasons for thinking that the earth is not
flat, we can then ask, OK, well, what kinds
of things lead people to believe this, right? One
way you might interpret what Sully's doing is something
along those lines, like how we, how we think
about conspiracy theories. He might say, look, we've got
good reasons to think that the arguments that Schopenhauer,
Hartmann, Pluemarker give are maybe not convincing, and then
we can, we can ask the question, what sentiments
have produced this? Like, if the theory doesn't work,
why have people been led to believe it? I
think that's a charitable way of reading what Sully's
doing. And if, if something like that is correct,
I think that Schopenhauer and Pluemarker have a a
more difficult task in trying to respond um to
this, this kind of charge. The primary way of
doing that is by, I think, if that's the
case, to try and bolster their arguments in some
way for the, the rational propositions they're putting forward.
So, If we can only really ask about the
psychological status of pessimism, once we've established that the
arguments in favor of the theory don't work, then
Schopenhauer and Plumarker have to make real sure that
those arguments, um, really are convincing, that the evidence
that they've provided, both conceptual and empirical, um, are
going to convince someone like Sully that, OK, we
can't really ask the psychological question because it's still
controversial whether life really is worth living, whether there's
more suffering than than happiness and so forth. Um,
BUT insofar as this kind of More general, um,
dismissal of pessimism as a mere psychological phenomenon. I
think that the three challenges that we've, we've talked
about just moments ago, um, I think those are
pretty, um, uh, pretty plausible ways of trying to,
to respond.
OK, so one last question, maybe a topic then.
uh, WE'VE talked about uh the philosophy of suicide
up until the 19th century. How about the philosophy
of suicide nowadays? I mean, what does it look
like? And when it comes to the several different
approaches to suicide, we've Gone through, like, for example,
the moral approach, the psychosociological approach, the biological approach,
which uh do you think are, is the most,
if there's one that is more dominant than the
others, which is the most dominant nowadays?
Yeah, it's a good question. Um, I, I, my
view of this is that contemporary um. Philosophy of
suicide is far more interdisciplinary uh than any of
these previous approaches, so it's not strictly one or
the other that we've considered today. But rather, it
takes into account that we need a sort of
more unified and comprehensive understanding of, of suicide, which
builds in empirical considerations, psychological, sociological, anthropological approaches, as
well as philosophical analysis, which engages with, yeah, conceptual
discussion, um, and these, these, these moral questions have
never really gone away. They've just kind of become
a bit more sophisticated. They've morphed into, you know,
Uh, particular traditions of approaching suicide, so you still
find people who have broadly Kian approaches to thinking
about the philosophy of suicide, the morality of it.
Um, YOU still have humans who deploy his arguments,
uh, or refine them in various ways. Um, SO
you have figures like Michael Cholby who does a
lot of work in this area, who's explicitly interdisciplinary
in this respect and. A lot of people who
have developed the philosophy of suicide into thinking about
adjacent um. Adjacent uh phenomena, uh, for example, Um,
experiences of grief, um. The and different kinds of
ways in which suicide can affect people um in
various ways. So, uh, my, my view is generally
the state of the philosophy of suicide now is
far more comprehensive and interdisciplinary, and that we've moved
away from this exclusively, specifically this exclusively medicalized um
approach to the uh to the phenomenon, which I
think is a a welcome response.
Great. So just before we go, would you like
to tell people again where, where they can find
you and your work on the internet?
Uh, YES. So, uh, all my work is, is
posted on my website, which is Patrick Hassan.com. Uh,
YOU can also find links to my work on
the department website at Cardiff University. Um, AND some
of the issues that we've been talking about, uh,
one is appearing, has appeared in the British Journal
for the History of Philosophy, James Sully's Psychological reduction
of pessimism, um, and some of these issues about
the philosophy of suicide in the 19th century and
how pessimists responded. Uh, SOME of my thoughts about
that are forthcoming in a chapter, um, in the
Oxford Handbook to the Philosophy of Suicide, edited by
Paolo Stellino and Michael Cholby. So that should be
out, uh, this year, I think.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again, Doctor Hassan.
It's always a pleasure to talk with you.
Uh, IT'S my honor. Yeah, thanks very much for
asking me back.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Curriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine, Gary
Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus
Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Eringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray, Zigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.